== NVMe notes ==

-- Chapter 1: introduction --

NVM Express (NVMe over PCIe): 
define a register level interface for host software to communicate with a non-volatile memory subsystem over PCI express

NVMe over Fabrics:
define a protocol interface and related extensions to NVMe that enable operation over other interconnects
(e.g., Ethernet, InfiniBant, Fibre Channel).

The interface has the following key attributes (page 9)

An NVM Express controller is associated with a single PCI Function: Controller Capabilities reg, Identify Controller data structure.

A namespace is a quantity of non-volatile memory that may be formatted into logical blocks.
		create, delete, attach namespace commands,
		identify namespace data structure for namespace id 0xFFFFFFFFh for capabilities and settings.

Submission Queue:  host place cmds into it.
Completion Queue: controller place completion into it.
Multiple Submission Queues  may utilize the same Completion Queue.

An Admin Submission and assoicated Completion Queue exist for the purpose of controller management and control
(Admin Command Set)
		create, delete io sq/cq, abort commands etc

IO queue pair: 1:1 sq/cq mapping, n:1 sq/cq mapping
(NVM Command Set)

SQ (submission queue): circular buffer with a fixed slot size, 64 bytes cmd,
		host software updates the appropriate SQ Tail doorbell register when theere are one to n new commands to execute.
		controller fetch SQ entries in order from the SQ, but may execute in any order.

Physical Region Page (PRP), Scatter Gather Lists (SGL) : (page 11)
Each command may include two PRP entries or one Scatter Gather List

CQ (completion queue): circular buffer with a fixed slot size, post status for completed commands.
		SQ identifier: command identifier that is assigned by host software.
		host software update CQ head pointer after it has processed completion queue entries (indicating the last free CQ entry).

Multi-Path IO: refer to two or more completely independent PCI Express paths between a single host and a namespace
Namespace Sharing: refer to the ability for two or more hosts to access a common shared namespace using different NVME controller.

Arbitration Burst:
		The maximum number of commands that may be launched at one time from a SQ that is using rr or wrr with urgent
		priority class arbitration.

Arbitration mechanism:
		The method used to determine which SQ is selected next to launch commands for execution by the controller.
		rr, wrr with urgent priority class, vendor specific

NVM subsystem:
		An NVM subsystem includes one or more controllers, one or more namespaces, one or more PCIE ports,
			a non-volatile memory storage medium, and an interface between the controler(s) and non-volatile memory storage medium.


-- Chapter 2: System Bus Register --

PCI Header notes (page 21)
MSI Capability, 
Advanced Error Reporting Capability (enable robust error handling)


-- Chapter 3: Controller Register --

Controller registers are located in the MLBAR/MUBAR registers (PCI BAR0 and BAR1): mmio, uncacheable


-- Chapter 4: Memory Structures --
CQ Head Doorbells, SQ Tail Doorbells: host software update the doorbell registers

Submitter, consumer both shall take queue wrap conditions into account. 

Host software shall create the CQ before creating any associated SQ.
Host software shall delete all associated SQ prior to deleting a CQ.
Host software issue Delete I/O SQ (abort all commands submitted for SQ).

If host software writes an invalid value to the SQ Tail Doorbell or CQ Head Doorbell register, an Asynchronous Event Request
		comand is outstanding, then an asynchronous event is posted to the Admin Completion Queue with a status code
		of Invalid Doorbell Write value.

I/O SQ, CQ defined as 64K entries, Admin SQ, CQ defined as 4K entries.
 
Physical Region Page Entry and List
	A PRP (physical region page) entry is a pointer to a physical memory page.
	PRPs are used as a scatter/gather mechanism for data transfers between the controller and memory.
	PRP entries are a fixed size.

	PRP list (A physical region page list is a set of PRP entries in a single page of contiguous memory).
	A PRP List describes additional PRP entries that could not be described within the command itself.

A Scatter Gather List (SGL) is a data structure in memory address space used to describe a data buffer.
A data buffer is either a source buffer or a destination buffer.

An SGL contains one or more SGL segments.
An SGL segment is a Qword aligned data structure in a contiguous region of physical memory describing all

The controller may support several physical formats of logical block size and associated metadata size.
		This is indicated as part of the identify namespace data structure.


